Regulations and Information Pack

MRCEM Primary Examination

Applicable from 1 August 2021




July 2021
Contents




  1. Introduction to the MRCEM and FRCEM Examination Structure

  2. Examination Regulations

  3. Introduction to the MRCEM Primary

  4. MRCEM Primary Eligibility Criteria

  5. Oversubscription Criteria

  6. Data sharing

  7. Exemption and Equivalent Examinations

  8. Number of attempts and currency

  9. Structure and Content of the MRCEM Primary

  10. Standard Setting and Examination Results

  11. Guidance for Candidates with Additional Requirements




                                          2
Introduction to the MRCEM and FRCEM Examination Structure – applicable from August 2021

In August 2021 the College will introduce the 2021 curriculum and the associated
examinations which are mapped to the curriculum.

From August 2021, the Membership examination consists of the following components:
   •   MRCEM Primary examination
   •   MRCEM Intermediate SBA examination
   •   MRCEM OSCE


From August 2021, the Fellowship examination consists of the following components:
   •   FRCEM SBA examination
   •   FRCEM OSCE



For further information regarding the MRCEM Intermediate SBA, MRCEM OSCE or the FRCEM
examinations, please refer to the relevant information pack, available on the Exams Section
of our website.




                                             3
Examination Regulations
   1. Applications for each component of the MRCEM and FRCEM examination should
      be submitted via the online application system, available via the Examinations
      Section of the College Website.
   2. Applications may only be submitted during a specified time period (‘the
      application window’). The date on which the application window opens
      (opening date) and closes for receipt of applications (the closing date) is
      published on the Examinations Section of the College Website.
   3. Candidates must be on the General Medical Council’s Register with a license to
      practice, or registered with the statutory regulator in the country in which they
      practice, without limitation on their practice. Candidates must declare if they have
      had at any time (or have pending) any investigations, suspensions, limitations or
      removal of medical registration in any country.
   4. Completed applications must be submitted by 17:00 (GMT) on the published
      closing date after which time the system automatically closes. Partially
      completed or late applications will not be accepted.
   5. It is a candidate’s responsibility to ensure they have all the information required to
      complete the entire application form prior to the application window closing on
      the advertised date at 17:00 (GMT).
   6. Upon submission of a completed application, candidates will receive an
      automated email confirming receipt of the application. Once the application has
      been approved candidates will receive an automated email to confirm this.
      Candidates will be sent a further email confirming details of their examination
      registration and instructions for booking their test appointment with Pearson VUE.
   7. Candidates wishing to withdraw or transfer their examination entry must notify the
      Examinations Department in writing by 17:00 (GMT) on the closing date. Fees
      cannot be transferred or refunded after this time.
   8. Candidates must apply for any required entry visas in good time prior to the date
      of the examination. In exceptional circumstances, subject to receipt of written
      documentation confirming the refusal of a visa, the Head of Examinations will
      consider requests for candidates to transfer their examination entry.
   9. Candidates who do not attend an examination will forfeit their examination fee. In
      exceptional circumstances, for matters beyond the candidate’s control, the Head of
      Examinations will consider requests to refund a candidate’s examination fee, subject
      to receipt of written documentation (e.g. a detailed medical certificate, a death
      certificate for a direct family member) within 20 working days from the date of the
      examination. Please note that insufficient preparation is not considered a sufficient
      reason to refund an examination entry.
   10. Candidates will be informed of the date on which examination results will be
       published at the time their examination entry is confirmed. In very exceptional
       circumstances this may be amended by the College and due notice will be
       published on the College website.
   11. Results will be published to candidates’ College website accounts and result
       letters can be downloaded on demand. Examination results will not be issued or
       confirmed by telephone or email.


                                             4
Introduction to the MRCEM Primary

The MRCEM Primary examination is mapped to the Emergency Medicine
2021Curriculum with more detailed information provided in the RCEM Basic Sciences
Curriculum (June 2010) which is available on the RCEM website. All applicants for
the MRCEM Primary examination are strongly advised to familiarise themselves with
the Basic Sciences Curriculum in preparation for sitting the MRCEM Primary
examination.

Candidates in the UK Foundation Programme may choose to sit the MRCEM Primary
examination during Foundation Year 1. However, candidates sitting the MRCEM
Primary examination before entry to a GMC approved Emergency Medicine training
programme should note that a pass in this examination will not count towards CCT if
it is taken out of training unless the candidate enters or re-enters the training
programme within seven years of passing the examination.

MRCEM Primary Eligibility Criteria

A candidate will be eligible to enter the MRCEM Primary examination provided they
holds a medical qualification approved by the General Medical Council (GMC) for
the purposes of registration.

Candidates who are registered with the GMC should include their registration
number in the appropriate place on the application form

Candidates registered with the Irish Medical Council (IMC) or an international
medical council are required to upload a copy of their current medical registration
document at the time of application.

Oversubscription Criteria

There is normally no restriction on the number of places available for the MRCEM
Primary examination but candidates may not always be allocated their first choice of
venue.

Data sharing

If you are registered or anticipate being registered with the GMC then your personal
data, including your examination results, will be passed to the GMC for quality
assurance and research purposes and to facilitate the awarding of certificates for
completion of training (CCTs).

If you are a trainee in UK Emergency Medicine training programme, your personal
data, including your examination results will be shared with your local Health
Education England (HEE) office and/or your Head of School or Programme director.




                                          5
Exemptions and equivalent examinations

FRCEM Primary
Candidates who have passed the FRCEM Primary between August 2016 and August
2021 are deemed to have passed an equivalent examination to the MRCEM Primary
examination.

MRCEM Part A
MRCEM Part A passes obtained prior to August 2012 are deemed time expired.
Candidates who sat the MRCEM Part A prior to August 2012 are therefore required to
pass the MRCEM Primary examination in order to sit further MRCEM or FRCEM
examinations.

Candidates who passed the MRCEM Part A examination after 1 August 2012 are
deemed to have passed an equivalent examination to the MRCEM Primary
examination.

MRCS or MRCSI
Trainees who are enrolled on the Defined Route of Entry into Emergency Medicine
(DRE-EM) programme and obtained MRCS or MRCSI after 1 January 2012 are exempt
from the MRCEM Primary examination. Such trainees are required to submit the
FRCEM Primary Exemption form, available on request from exams@rcem.ac.uk, and
a copy of their MRCS or MRCSI certificate to the Examination Department at least six
weeks prior to applying for the MRCEM SBA examination in order to obtain exemption
from the MRCEM Primary.

Number of attempts and currency
Candidates are permitted a maximum of six attempts in which to pass the MRCEM
Primary Examination. Previous attempts at the FRCEM Primary examination after
August 2016 will count towards the number of available attempts.

In exceptional circumstances candidates may apply for approval for an additional
examination attempt. Such cases will be dealt with on a case by case basis at the
discretion of the Dean, whose decision is final.

Candidates with a late diagnosis of a neurodiverse condition (such as dyslexia, ADD,
ASD) and who have previously sat an examination component without agreed
reasonable adjustments may apply to the Dean to expunge such attempts. Such
cases will be dealt with on a case by case basis at the discretion of the Dean, whose
decision is final.

A pass in the MRCEM Primary examination will remain current. If at some future date
it becomes necessary to replace it, holders of the MRCEM Primary examination will
be given a minimum of 24 months’ notice of the date from which it will be deemed
time expired.




                                          6
Structure and Content of the MRCEM Primary

The MRCEM Primary examination consists of a 3 hour, multiple choice question
(MCQ) paper of 180, single best answer questions (SBAQ).

RCEM delivers its written examinations electronically via computer-based testing
company, Pearson VUE. https://home.pearsonvue.com/rcem

The examination is conducted in English and candidates are advised that IELTS Level
7 is the expected standard for completion of MRCEM and FRCEM examinations.

The blueprint for the MRCEM Primary Examination is as follows:

Category                Sub-Category                      Questions
Anatomy                 Upper limb                           60
                        Lower limb
                        Thorax
                        Abdomen
                        Head and Neck
                        Central Nervous System
                        Cranial Nerve Lesions
Physiology              Basic celluar physiology                 60
                        Respiratory physiology
                        Cardiovascular physiology
                        Gastrointestinal physiology
                        Renal physiology
                        Endocrine physiology
                        Gastrointestinal
Pharmacology            pharmacology                             24
                        Cardiovascular system
                        Respiratory system
                        Central Nervous System
                        Infections
                        Endocrine system
                        Fluids and electrolytes
                        Muscoskeletal system
                        Immunological products and
                        vaccines
                        Anaesthesia
Microbiology            Principles of microbiology               17
                        Pathogen groups
Pathology               Inflammatory responses                   9
                        Immune responses
                        Infection
                        Wound healing
                        Haematology




                                          7
Evidence Based
Medicine               Statistics                            10
                       Study methodology
                       Principles of critical appraisal
TOTAL                                                        180



Standard Setting and Examination Results

The MRCEM Primary examination is standard set using the Angoff Method. The
MRCEM Primary examination results will be published on a pre-advised day by 17:00,
approximately five weeks after the date of the examination. Results will be released
to candidates’ College website accounts where results letters can be downloaded
on demand. Examination results will not be issued or confirmed by telephone or
email.

Guidance for Candidates with Additional Requirements

The College is committed to supporting candidates by providing fair opportunities
when undertaking examinations. Candidates may submit a request for reasonable
adjustments and should note that the responsibility for requesting adjustments lies
with them.

Please refer to more detailed guidance here.

Appeals Policy

Candidates who have sat this exam and feel their performance was affected by a
procedural irregularity and/or exceptional circumstances have the right to appeal
in line with our Appeals Policy.

Complaints Policy

Candidates who are dissatisfied with any part of the service they receive have the
right to complain in line with our Complaints Policy.




                                             8
